---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: Jamaicaʻs Cannabis Culture
date: 2019-05-08
labels:
  - History 
  - Jamaica
---
When you think of Jamaica what comes to mind? Is it the sunny beaches or clear blue water? Or the sound of Ziggy Marley and reggae music? All of these are great answers, but there is one thing that is quite synonymous with Jamaica, cannabis. Although cannabis is popular among Jamaican culture, it has not been legal in over 100 years. In fact, before 2015 possession of cannabis would result in mandatory jail time. Cannabis hasn't always been existent with Jamaican culture. It wasn't until the mid 1800s that cannabis found its way to Jamaica. Surely, Jamaica is a hotspot for cannabis cultivation. The warm, tropical climate along with the rich fertile soil are ideal for the growing of cannabis plants. In addition, Jamaica is also the birthplace of the Rastafari movement, which promotes a religious use of “ganja” and has a large number of followers in the island. Still, the use of cannabis is widely spread among all social classes across Jamaica and is without argument one of the most popular crops in the island. The research presented takes a look at how cannabis became so synonymous with Jamaica.
	
First we must take a look at how cannabis ended up on the island. When Britain abolished slavery in the 1800s, unfortunately it still continued in the Caribbean. Remember the Taino people were the original inhabitants of the island, but most of the population was wiped out due to disease, famine, or forced labor when Columbus arrived in the 1400s (Rough). Now because of this, the British needed workers to work at the sugar plantations so they shipped slaves from West Africa. As a result, the slaves were unhappy with their roles on the island, so they rebelled whenever they could. Many of them were successful in running away from the plantations and joining the Maroons in the remote mountains (“The History of Jamaica”). After these rebellions, plantation owners needed workers to work their field. What they did was they import indentured servants from East India. It was these East Indian laborers who brought over the first seedlings of cannabis that sparked a movement. India’s influence on cannabis in Jamaica is also evident in common phrasing. “Ganja,” the preferred term for cannabis, which is a Hindi word meaning “hemp” or “hemp resin.” (Rough). From this point, ganja became a major staple in Jamaican culture. Ganja was popular among the lower working classes and was common in the rural countryside and in poor black districts of larger towns. Ganja also became synonymous with the Rastafari movement, a religion popular in Jamaica.
 
Rastafari was formed in the 1930s around the coronation of Haile Selassie I as the Emperor of Ethiopia. Haile Selassie is seen as the second coming of Christ based on the fact that Marcus Garvey, a pan-Africanist said in 1920 “Look to Africa, when a black king shall be crowned, for the day of deliverance is at hand”.  The emergence of Rastafarian culture cemented the culture of cannabis in Jamaica. Rastafarians regularly use cannabis spiritually during ceremonies as an aid for meditation. During “reasoning” sessions, Rastas gather to smoke the “holy herb” and discuss moral quandaries while passing the ganja clockwise around the circle. In times of war, the passing of the ganja is done counterclockwise to connect with “Jah,” the singular God that Rastas worship (Boekhout van Solinge).

The use of the holy herb is not only considered a mind-altering substance, but its use is supposed to lead to a deeper faith. Cannabis is also used during Rastafari “groundation” celebration ceremonies, which are marked with singing, dancing, feasting, and smoking the usual herb. While the Rastafari religion is common in Jamaica and certainly contributed to the popularization of cannabis, Rastafarians are not the only Jamaicans who use and appreciate the plant. Based on an anthropological study of cannabis use in the region, it is estimated that 60-70 percent of Jamaicans use ganja regularly (Rough). 

Many Jamaicans drink ganja tea  to which they attribute various therapeutic and disease-preventing qualities as medicine. The tea is said to make the body strong and less susceptible to illness. It is also often drunk, if someone suffers from a fever or a cold. Furthermore, ganja is said to be a good remedy for stress. In Jamaica, ganja is linked to all components of working class structure. Alcohol (specifically rum), is a common drink to the Jamaican working-class, but users of ganja would rather prefer the ganja over alcohol. Reasons for this are people mention therapeutic, behavioral, and work benefits. To go along with these reasons, ganja users claim alcohol to be harmful not to just an individual, but to his/her social relationships. Upper and middle class workers consider ganja to be emotionally and physically damaging, giving it an image where it is linked to crime, violence, and emotional instability. 

Contrasts in reaction to ganja have sparked a social phenomena as ganja users religiously disagree with these accusations. Instead they claim the cause of such improper behavior is the personality of the person rather than the plant itself. Ganja has made its way to a slight majority of the upper and middle class, but it is viewed in a completely different way. To them ganja includes attributes of enhanced creativity, escape from boredom, enhanced sex drive, and an increase in hunger. In order to truly measure usage and reaction of ganja users, you must find a correlation between usage rate (times smoked per day) and potency of the plant. Lower working-class citizens consume far more ganja in longer periods of time than upper/middle class citizens. They are also far more familiar with ganja, therefore there tolerance is much greater than an upper/middle class citizen (Rubin and Comitas).   

The reason cannabis is given such a negative image can be credited to a man named Harry S. Anslinger, a notorious racist politician and government official. He noticed the rise of cannabis in Jamaica, and as their product made its way to the United States, its popularity began to increase exponentially. At the time in the United States, there were concerns about allegations that cannabis serves as a gateway to more hazardous drugs, such as heroin and cocaine. The public and doctors denied these allegations and viewed cannabis as medicine. This does not apply to ganja users in Jamaica. After years of ganja use for medical and psychoactive purposes, people have claimed that they have not experimented with other drugs after consumption of ganja. 
Since cannabis was becoming popular amongst the minorities in the US, Anslinger and his xenophobia began to act.  He began to institute the plant’s prohibition by creating propaganda that based upon absolutely nothing. Remember, at the time both alcohol and cannabis were both under prohibition, but the reason prohibition on alcohol ended and cannabis persisted is because of propaganda generated by the US government (Anslinger) that was based on racial and xenophobic fears. Examples of propaganda used were Anslinger saying “Marijuana makes darker races feel equal to the white man. Anslinger sparked the Marijuana Tax Act, which would restrict possession of cannabis to those who paid a tax for authorized medical or industrial use. Anyone who didn’t pay the tax could face a penalty of up to $2,000 and five years in prison (Jenison).
To impose his take on cannabis, Anslinger went on a propaganda offensive, telling “the story of this evil weed of the fields and river beds and roadsides” in magazines, on the radio and in public forums. He was aided by “yellow journalism” mogul William Randolph Hearst, who sold newspapers by hysterically trumpeting a different national threat every week, from marijuana to immigrants to Communism. In Hearst’s Washington Herald, Anslinger proclaimed on April 12, 1937, “If the hideous monster Frankenstein came face to face with the monster marihuana, he would drop dead of fright." Anslinger claimed that cannabis made people “fly into a delirious rage” and “commit violent crimes.” (Jenison). 

Cannabis has been a part of Jamaican culture for many years but it wasn’t until recently that use of cannabis became decriminalized and hopefully, it’s not long before marijuana can be legally accessible for tourists. Over the years, the image of cannabis has been a mix of positive and negative opinions. In Jamaica, ganja plays an important role in culture religiously and medically. For the Rastafari, the ganja puts them in a state where they feel closer to Jah, while outsiders not familiar with the religious practice feel like it is just an excuse to get high. The reasoning sessions they partake in are a chance to speak philosophy with one another and discuss problems that present in the modern world. Also ganja users claim marijuana lowers their stress levels after a long days worth of work. Recently legalization of cannabis has been a topic of conversation. Jamaicans have been demanding for the legalization of ganja for many years, not only in their music but also in the form of demonstrations.. In the US, cannabis is considered a Category 1 drug although it is nowhere near the definition of a category 1 drug, which is 1) no medical use 2) high abuse potential and 3) severe safety concerns. As with many disputes, there are two sides and thanks to people like Anslinger this will continue to be an ongoing debate.  

Sources: 
Boekhout van Solinge, Tim. “Ganja in Jamaica.” Ganja in Jamaica, Tim Boekhout Van Solinge, 
2 Dec. 1996.
“Ganja and Society.” Ganja in Jamaica: a Medical Anthropological Study of Chronic Marihuana 
Use, by Vera D. Rubin and Lambros Comitas, Mouton and Company Publishers, 1995, pp. 161–164.
Jenison, David. “Harry Anslinger: The Godfather of Cannabis Prohibition.” PRØHBTD, 
PRØHBTD, 2019.
Rough, Lisa. “Jamaica's Cannabis Roots: The History of Ganja on the Island.” Leafly, 
Leafly , 15 May 2015.
“The History of Jamaica.” Jamaica Information Service, Jamaica Information Service, 
2019.

